  Capturing Planned Protests from Open Source
                  Indicators

    Sathappan Muthiah, Bert Huang, Jaime Arredondo,
David Mares, Lise Getoor, Graham Katz and Naren Ramakrishnan
  Civil unrest events (protests, strikes, and ‘‘occupy’’ events) are common
  occurrences in both democracies and authoritarian regimes. The study of civil
  unrest is a key topic for political scientists as it helps capture an important
  mechanism by which citizenry express themselves. In countries where civil
  unrest is lawful, qualitative analysis has revealed that more than 75% of the
  protests are planned, organized, and/or announced in advance; therefore
  detecting references to future planned events in relevant news and social
  media is a direct way to develop a protest forecasting system. We report on a
  system for doing that in this paper. It uses a combination of keyphrase
  learning to identify what to look for, probabilistic soft logic to reason about
  location occurrences in extracted results, and time normalization to resolve
  future time mentions. We illustrate the application of our system to 10
  countries in Latin America, viz. Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador,
  El Salvador, Mexico, Paraguay, Uruguay, and Venezuela. Results demonstrate
  our successes in capturing significant societal unrest in these countries with an
  average lead time of 4.08 days. We also study the selective superiorities of
  news media versus social media (Twitter, Facebook) to identify relevant
  trade-offs.
  Civil unrest events (protests, strikes, and ‘‘occupy’’ events) are common
occurrences in both democracies and in authoritarian regimes. Although we
typically associate civil unrest with disruptions and instability, social scientists
believe that civil unrest reflects the democratic process by which citizenry
communicate their views and preferences to those in authority. The advent of social
media has afforded citizenry new mechanisms for organization and mobilization,
and online news sources and social networking sites like Facebook and Twitter can
provide a window into civil unrest happenings in a particular country.
Why study and forecast protests? Our
primary region of interest is Latin America            Figure 1: An example article
(secondary regions of interest include the             describing plans for a future
Middle East and North Africa), and protest             protest (Venezuela, June 11,
is an important topic of study in this region,                     2014).
as many countries here are democracies
struggling to consolidate themselves.
The combination of weak channels of
communication between citizen and government, and a citizenry that still has not
grasped the desirability of elections as the means to affect politics means that
public protest will be an especially attractive option. To illustrate the power of
protest in Latin America we need only recall that between 1985 and 2011, 17
presidents resigned or were impeached under pressure from demonstrations,
usually violent, in the streets. Protests have also resulted in the rollback of price
increases for public services, such as during the ‘Brazilian Spring’ of June 2013.
   Forecasting protests is an important capability in many domains. For the tourism
industry, forecasting protests can support the issuance of travel warnings. For law
enforcement, forecasting protests can aid in preparedness. For social scientists,
forecasting protests will provide insight into how citizens express themselves. For
governments, a protest forecasting system can help prioritize citizen grievances.
Finally, protests can have a debilitating effect on multiple industries (especially
those that rely on worldwide supply chain management) and thus a protest
forecasting system can aid in planning and design of alternative travel and
shipping routes.
Planned protests Our basic hypothesis is that protests that are larger will be
more disruptive and communicate support for its cause better than smaller
protests. Mobilizing large numbers of people is more likely to occur if a protest is
organized and the time and place announced in advance. Because protest is costly
and more likely to succeed if it is large, we should expect planned, rather than
spontaneous, protests to be the norm. Indeed, in a sample of 288 events from our
study selected for qualitative review of their antecedents, for 225 we located
communications regarding the upcoming occurrence of the event in media, and
only 49 could be classified as spontaneous (we could not determine whether
communications had or had not occurred in the remaining 14 cases).

EMBERS (Early Model Based Event Recognition using Surrogates) We are an
industry-university partnership charged with developing an automatic protest
forecasting system for 10 countries in Latin America (LA) and 7 countries in the
Middle East and North Africa region (MENA). Our system, called EMBERS, has
been deployed since Nov 2012 and has been generating forecasts (called warnings
or alerts) automatically, without a human-in-the-loop, since then (the MENA
region was added in July 2014). These forecasts are emailed to a third party
(MITRE) for evaluation. Analysts at MITRE organize a reference database of
protests (called the Gold Standard Report, or GSR) by surveying newspapers for
reports of protests, and compare our warnings against the GSR to generate a
scoring report, using evaluation criteria described later.
   The full EMBERS system has been described elsewhere (Ramakrishnan et al.
2014;
Doyle et al. 2014), including the overall system architecture, data sources used for
analysis, and the various forecasting models that make up the system. EMBERS
adopts a multi-model approach, wherein different models are leveraged for their
selective superiorities to generate a fused set of alerts. One of the best performing
models in EMBERS is the planned protest model that detects ongoing
organizational activity and generates warnings accordingly. This paper is the first
to present this model in detail, including the research issues involved, and how we
addressed them in EMBERS.
   Capturing mentions of protest planning and organization is not as easy as it
might appear. First, articles of interest are written in different languages (Spanish,
Portuguese, French, Dutch, and English). Second, multiple locations are often
mentioned in a given article, leading to (natural language) ambiguity about the
intended location of the event. Significant reasoning is required to discern the
correct protest location. Finally, identifying the date of a planned event in Latin
America involves significant multilingual temporal-semantic natural language
processing as dates are often described with vague, relative, or otherwise
context-dependent expressions (e.g., Sunday or in two days).
   Our detection approach combines shallow linguistic analysis to identify relevant
documents (articles, tweets) with targeted deep semantic analysis of the selected
documents. Despite its simplicity, this approach is capable of detecting indicators
of event planning with surprisingly high accuracy.
   Our contributions are:
1. We present a protest forecasting system that couples three key technical ideas:
   keyphrase learning to identify what to look for, probabilistic soft logic to reason
   about location occurrences in extracted results, and date normalization to resolve
   future tense mentions. We demonstrate how the integration of these ideas
   achieves objectives in precision, recall, and quality (accuracy).
2. We illustrate the application of our system to 10 countries in Latin America, viz.
   Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Paraguay,
   Uruguay, and Venezuela. Our system predicts the when of the protest as well as
   where of the protest (down to a city level granularity). We conduct ablation
   studies to identify the relative contributions of news media (news + blogs)
   versus social media (Twitter, Facebook) to identify future happenings of civil
   unrest. Through these studies we illustrate the selective superiorities of different
   sources for specific countries.
3. Unlike many studies of retrospective forecasting of protests, our system has been
   deployed and in operation for nearly three years. The end consumers of our
   alerts are analysts studying Latin America. Our results demonstrate that we are
   able to capture significant societal unrest in the above countries with an average
   lead time of 4.08 days.
                                  Related Work
 Five categories of related work are briefly discussed here (see also Table 1).
    Event detection via text extractions is an extensively studied topic in the
 literature. Document clustering techniques are used in, e.g., (Gabrilovich, Dumais,
 and Horvitz 2004) to identify events retrospectively or as the stories arrive. Works
 like (Banko et al. 2007;
 Chambers and Jurafsky 2011;
 Riloff and Wiebe 2003) focus on extraction patterns (templates) to extract
 information from text.
    Temporal information extraction is another well studied topic. The TempEval
 challenge (Verhagen et al. 2009) led to a significant amount of algorithmic
 development for temporal NLP. For instance a specification language for temporal
 and event expressions in natural language text is described in (Pustejovsky et al.
 2003). References (Llorens et al. 2012) and (Mani and Wilson 2000) provide
 methods to resolve temporal expressions in text (our own work here uses the
TIMEN package (Llorens et al. 2012) and more recently the HeidelTime
                ¨
package (Strotgen    et al. 2014)).
    Event forecasting: Radinsky and Horvitz (2013) find event sequences from a
 corpora and then use these sequences to determine if an event of interest (e.g., a
 disease outbreak, or a riot) will occur sometime in the future. This work predicts
 only if a potential event will happen given a historical event sequence but does not
 geolocate the event to a city-level resolution, as we do here. Kallus (2014) make use
 of event data from RecordedFuture (Truv´e 2011) to determine if a significant
protest event will occur in the subsequent three days and casts this as a
 classification problem. This work only focuses on prediction of significant events
(suitably defined) and the forecast is limited to a fixed time window of the next
 three days.
    Future retrieval: Baeza-Yates (2005) provides one of the earliest discussions of
 this topic; here future temporal information in text is found and used to retrieve
 content from search queries that combine both text and time with a simple ranking
 scheme. Kawai et al. (2010) present a search engine (ChronoSeeker) for searching
 future and past events. RecordedFuture (Truv´e 2011), introduced earlier, conducts
 real-time analysis of news and tweets to identify mentions of events along with
 associated times. Anecdotally it is estimated that approximately (only) 5--7% of
 events extracted by RecordedFuture are about the future.
    Planned protest detection: Two publications---Compton et al. (2013) and Xu et
 al. (2014)---align very closely to our own work as their emphasis is on protest
 forecasting. Both works are aimed at forecasting protests but emphasize different
 data sources and different methodologies. For instance, the work in (Compton et al.
 2013) filters the Twitter stream for keywords of interest and searches for future
 date mentions in only absolute terms, i.e., explicit mentions of a month name and a
 number (date) less than 31. Such an approach will not be capable of extracting the
 more common way in which future dates are referenced, e.g., phrases like
‘‘tomorrow,’’ ‘‘next tuesday.’’ The work in (Xu et al. 2014) by the same group of
 authors uses the Tumblr feed with a smaller set of keywords but again is restricted
 to the use of absolute time identifiers.
        Table 1: Comparison of our approach against other techniques.

                                       Relative     Ingest     Reasoning   Learning
                                       date         multiple   about       word/phrase
                                       resolution   sources?   location    filters
‘Future’ Search Engines (Kawai et      X
al. 2010; Jatowt and Au Yeung 2011;
Baeza-Yates 2005)
Time-to-Event Recognition (Tops,       X
van den Bosch, and Kunneman
2013; Hurriyetoglu, Kunneman, and
van den Bosch 2013)
Planned Protest Detection (Xu et al.                X
2014; Compton et al. 2013)
This paper                             X            X          X           X
                              Probabilistic Soft Logic
In this section, we briefly describe probabilistic soft logic (PSL) (Kimmig et al.
2012), a key component of our geocoding strategy. PSL is a framework for
collective probabilistic reasoning on relational domains. PSL represents the domain
of interest as logical atoms. It uses first order logic rules to capture the dependency
structure of the domain, based on which it builds a joint probabilistic model over
all atoms. Instead of hard truth values of 0 (false) and 1 (true), PSL uses soft truth
values relaxing the truth values to the interval [0,1]. The logical connectives are
adapted accordingly.
   User defined predicates are used to encode the relationships and attributes and
rules capture the dependencies and constraints. The rules can also be labeled with
non-negative weights which are used during the inference process. The set of
predicates and weighted rules thus make up a PSL program where known truth
values of ground atoms are derived from observed data and unknown truth values
for the remaining atoms are learned using the PSL inference.
 Example 1. We will follow a running example throughout this section. In our geocoding
 subtask, we create a PSL program that reasons about the predicate R EFERS T O, which maps
 a text string to real-world locations. For example, R EFERS T O(‘‘DC’’, washingtonDC)
 evaluates to true if the knowledge base believes that the article refers to Washington D.C. as
‘‘DC.’’ This predicate gets used in rules that define dependencies between predicates, such
 as the rule
E NTITY(L, location) ∧ R EFERS T O(L, locID)
        → PSLL OCATION(Article, locID),
which states that an entity extracted from an article text that matches a known R EFERS T O
mapping implies that the PSL program’s predicted location will follow that mapping. Some
of these logical atoms will be known as parts of a knowledge base, while others will be
unknown and will be inferred by PSL.
   Given a set of atoms ` = {`1 , . . . , `n }, an interpretation defined as I : ` → [0, 1]n
is a mapping from atoms to soft truth values. PSL defines a probability distribution
over all such interpretations such that those that satisfy more ground rules are
more probable. Lukasiewicz t-norm and its corresponding co-norm are used for
defining relaxations of the logical AND and OR respectively to determine the
degree to which a ground rule is satisfied. Given an interpretation I, PSL defines
the formulas for the relaxation of the logical conjunction (∧), disjunction (∨), and
negation (¬) as follows:
                           `1 ∧ `2 = max{0, I(`1 ) + I(`2 ) − 1},
                           `1 ∨ `2 = min{I(`1 ) + I(`2 ), 1},
                               ¬l1 = 1 − I(`1 ),
   The interpretation I determines whether the rules are satisfied. A rule
r ≡ rbody → rhead is satisfied if and only if the truth value of head is at least that of
the body. Otherwise, PSL uses a distance to satisfaction, which measures the degree
to which this condition is violated
                           dr (I ) = max{0,I (rbody ) − I (rhead )}.
Example 2. Continuing the previous example, if we have the rule
E NTITY(‘‘Washington’’, location) ∧
       R EFERS T O(‘‘Washington’’, washingtonDC)
          → PSLL OCATION(Article, washingtonDC),
and the truth values of the known atoms are
                           E NTITY (‘‘Washington’’, location): 1.0
and
                     R EFERS T O(‘‘Washington’’, washingtonDC): 0.6,
Figure 2: Schematic of the planned protest detector that ingests five different types
                                 of data sources.



then following the relaxation of logical AND, the truth value of the antecedent is
max{0, 1.0 + 0.6 − 1} = 0.6. Moreover, if the truth value of the atom to be inferred,
PSLL OCATION(Article, washingtonDC), is 0.1, then the distance to satisfaction of this
rule is max{0, 0.6 − 0.1} = 0.5. On the other hand, if the truth value of the head is 0.7,
then the distance to satisfaction is max{0, 0.6 − 0.7} = 0, meaning the rule is satisfied.
  PSL then induces a probability distribution over possible interpretations I over
the given set of ground atoms l in the domain. If R is the set of all ground rules that
are instances of a rule from the system and uses only the atoms in I then, the
probability density function f over I is defined as
                                                                 !
                                     1          X
                                                               p
                            f (I) = exp −          λr (dr (I))                           (1)
                                     Z
                                               r∈R
                                   Z                           !
                                              X
                              Z = exp −           λr (dr (I))p                           (2)
                                   I         r∈R
   where λr is the weight of the rule r, Z is a normalization constant, and p ∈ 1, 2
provides a choice between linear or quadratic loss functions, which produce
different modeling behavior. PSL further allows inclusion of linear equality and
inequality constraints, which enable modeling of functional constraints on the
domains and ranges of predicates.
   The probability distribution in Equation (1) is an example of a hinge-loss Markov
random field (Bach et al. 2013), which has a form of energy function that makes
inference of the most probable explanation an efficient convex optimization. The
expressiveness of PSL and the efficiency of inference in its models allows us to
encode dependencies between various aspects of geolocation that are jointly
inferred.
Example 3. The joint probability distribution enables PSL to reason about conflicting
evidence, for example if we additionally have the atom
R EFERS T O(‘‘Washington’’, Washington State) in our knowledge base with truth value
0.2, we would have two conflicting PSLL OCATION implications. The probabilistic,
weighted rules, as well as the soft truth values of known atoms control how much PSL
considers each piece of evidence, and additional corroborating or conflicting evidence would
also be incorporated into the final joint inference.

                                       Approach
The general approach we adopt is to identify open-source documents that appear
to indicate civil unrest event planning, extract relevant information from identified
documents and use that as the basis for a structured warning about the planned
event. Each of these processing steps (see Fig. 2) is outlined next.

Linguistic Preprocessing
Since our region of interest is Latin America as well as the Middle East and North
Africa, the collection of text harvested is inherently multilingual, with Spanish,
Portuguese, Arabic, and English as the dominating languages. Ingested documents
are subjected to shallow linguistic processing prior to analysis. This initial
processing involves identifying the language of the document, distinguishing the
words (tokenization), normalizing words for inflection (lemmatization), and
identifying expressions referring to people, places, dates and other entities. We use
Basis Technology’s Rosette Linguistics Platform (RLP) suite of multilingual
commercial tools (http://www.basistech.com/text-analytics/rosette/) for this
processing. The output of this linguistic preprocessing serves as input to
subsequent deeper analysis in which date expressions are normalized, sentences
that appear to be describing protest planning are identified, and the geographic
focus of the text computed.

Date Normalization
Date processing is particularly crucial to the identification and interpretation of
statements about future events. We used the TIMEN (Llorens et al. 2012) date
normalization package to normalize date expressions in English, Spanish and
Portuguese (extended the system to cover Portuguese) and the
                  ¨
HeidelTime (Strotgen     et al. 2014) to do the same for Arabic (extending the set of
rules to handle Hijri dates). Both systems rules were extended to improve coverage
and accuracy on our document collection.
   The systems make use of meta-data such as the day of publication and other
information about the linguistic context to determine for each date expression,
what day (or week, month or year) it refers to. For example in a tweet produced on
June 10, 2014, the occurrence of the term Friday used in a future-tense sentence
We’ll get together on Friday will be interpreted as June 13, 2014. Each expression
identified as a date by the RLP preprocessor is normalized in this way, with
accuracy of just over 80% on our data set.

Phrase filtering
In order to identify relevant documents, input documents are filtered on a set of
keyphrases, i.e., the text of the document is searched for the presence of one or
more keyphrases in a list of phrases which are indicative of an article’s focus being
a planned civil unrest event. The list of keyphrases indicating civil unrest planning
was obtained in a semi-automatic manner, as detailed below. Articles which do
match are processed further, those that do not are ignored.
Phrase matching Our keyphrase matching is highly general and linguistically
sophisticated. The phrases in our list are general rules for matching, rather than
literal string sequences. Typically a phrase specification comprises: two or more
word lemmas, a language specification, and a separation threshold. This indicates
that words---potentially inflected forms---in a given sequence potentially separated
by one or more other words, should be taken to be a match. We determined that
this kind of multi-word keyphrases was more accurate than simple keywords for
extracting events of interest from the data stream.
   The presence of a keyphrase is checked by searching for the presence of
individual lemmas of the keyphrase within the same sentence separated by at most
a number of words that is fewer than the separation threshold. This method allows
for linguistically sophisticated and flexible matching, so, for example, the
keyphrase [plan protest, 4, English] would match the sentence The students are
planning a couple big protests tomorrow in an input document.
Phrase list development The set of keyphrases was tailored (slightly) to the
genre of the input. In particular different phrases were used to identify relevant
news articles and blogs from those used to filter tweets. The lists themselves were
generated semi-automatically.
  Initially, a few seed phrases were obtained manually with the help of subject
matter experts. An analysis of news reports for planned protests in the print media
helped create a minimum set of words to use in the query. We choose four nouns
from the basic query that is used predominantly to indicate a civil unrest in the
print media - demonstration, march, protest and strike. We translated them into
Spanish and Portuguese, including synonyms. We then combined these with
future-oriented verbs, e.g., to organize, to prepare, to plan, and to announce. For
Twitter, shorter phrases were identified, and these had a more direct call for action,
e.g., marchar, manh˜a de mobiliza¸ca˜ o, vamos protestar, huelga.
  To generalize this set of phrases, the phrases were then parsed using a
dependency parser (Padro´ and Stanilovsky 2012) and the grammatical relationship
between the core nominal focus word (e.g., protest, manifestaci´on, huelga) and any
accompanying word (e.g., plan, call, anunciar) was extracted. These grammatical
     Figure 3: An example of phrase learning for detecting planned protests.



relations were used as extraction patterns as in (Riloff and Wiebe 2003) to learn
more phrases from a corpora of sentences extracted from the data stream of interest
(either news/blogs or tweets). This corpus consists of sentences that contained any
one of the nominal focus words and also had mentions of a future date. The
separation threshold for a phrase was also learned, being set to the average number
of words separating the nominal focus and the accompanying word.
   The set of learned phrases is then reviewed by a subject matter expert for quality
control. Using this approach, we learned 112 phrases for news articles and blogs
and 156 for tweets. This phrase learning process is illustrated in Fig. 3.

Geocoding
After linguistic preprocessing and suitable phrase filtering, messages are geocoded
with a specification of the geographical focus of the text---specified as a city, state,
country triple---that indicates the locality that the text is about. We make use of
different geocoding methodologies for Twitter messages, for Facebook Events
pages, and for news articles and blogs. These are described below.
Twitter and Facebook For tweets, the geographic focus of the message is
generated by a fairly simple set of heuristics involving i) the most reliable but least
available source, i.e., the geotag (latitude, longitude) of the tweet itself, ii) Twitter
places metadata, and iii) if the above are not available, the text fields contained in
the user profile (location, description) as well as the tweet text itself to find
mentions of relevant locations. Additional toponym disambiguation heuristics are
used to identify the actual referent of the mention. Similar methods are used to
geocode event data extracted from Facebook event pages.
News and Blogs For longer articles such as news articles, the geographic focus of
the message is identified using much more complex methods to extract the protest
location from news articles. We use PSL to build a probabilistic model that infers
the intended location of a protest by weighing evidence coming from entities
extracted by the RLP preprocessor and information in the World Gazetteer.
   The primary rules in the model encode the effect that RLP extracted location
strings that match to gazetteer aliases are indicators of the article’s location,
whether they be country, state, or city aliases. Each of these implications is
conjuncted with a prior for ambiguous, overloaded aliases that is proportional to
the population of the gazetteer location. For example, if the string ‘‘Los Angeles’’
appears in the article, it could refer to either Los Angeles, California, or Los
 ´
Angeles  in Argentina or Chile. Given no other information, our model would infer
a higher truth value for the article referring to Los Angeles, California, because it
has a much higher population than the other options.
E NTITY(L, location) ∧ R EFERS T O(L, locID)
        → PSLL OCATION(Article, locID)

E NTITY(C, location) ∧ I S C OUNTRY(C)
        → A RTICLE C OUNTRY(Article, C)

E NTITY(S, location) ∧ I S S TATE(S)
        → A RTICLE S TATE(Article, S)
(Note that the above are not deterministic rules; e.g., they do not use the logical
conjunction but rather the Lukasiewicz t-norm based relaxation. Further, these
rules do not fire deterministically but are instead simultaneously solved for
satisfying assignments as described in the section on Probabilistic Soft Logic (PSL).)
  The secondary rules, which are given half the weight of the primary rules,
perform the same mapping of extracted strings to gazetteer aliases, but for
 Figure 4: An example of location inference using PSL. Red circles denote named
entities identified as locations and blue denotes other types of entities. The article
 describes students planning a march on Sunday. It identifies multiple locations,
e.g., Chacao, El Roso, and the Francisco Fajardo highway where protests have been
happening. There is also a reference to a quote by the mayor of Baruto. Mentions of
   such multiple locations are resolved using our PSL program to the intended
                                location, here Caracas.



extracted persons and organizations. Strings describing persons and organizations
often include location clues (e.g., ‘‘mayor of Buenos Aires’’), but intuition suggests
the correlation between the article’s location and these clues may be lower than
with location strings.
E NTITY(O, organization) ∧ R EFERS T O(O, locID)
        → PSLL OCATION(Article, locID)

E NTITY(O, organization) ∧ I S C OUNTRY(O)
        → A RTICLE C OUNTRY(Article, O)

E NTITY(O, organization) ∧ I S S TATE(O)
        → A RTICLE S TATE(Article, O)
Finally, the model includes rules and constraints to require consistency between
the different levels of geolocation, making the model place higher probability on
states with its city contained in its state, which is contained in its country. As a
post-processing step, we enforce this consistency explicitly by using the inferred
city and its enclosing state and country, but adding these rules into the model
make the probabilistic inference prefer consistent predictions, enabling it to
combine evidence at all levels.
PSLL OCATION(Article, locID) ∧ C OUNTRY(locID, C)
             → A RTICLE C OUNTRY(Article, C)

PSLL OCATION(Article, locID) ∧ A DMIN 1(locID, S)
             → A RTICLE S TATE(Article, S)
   As an example of how PSL aids in location identification, the protest from Fig. 1
is revisited in Fig. 4, which illustrates the evidence that the PSL model gathers from
the news article and the inferred locations.
   We evaluate our planned protest detection system for Latin America using
metrics similar to those described in Ramakrishnan et al. (2014). Given a set of
alerts issued by the system and the GSR comprising actual protest incidents, we
aim to identify a correspondence between the two sets via a bipartite matching. An
alert can be matched to a GSR event only if i) they are both issued for the same
country, ii) the alert’s predicted location and the event’s reported location are
within 300km of each other (the distance offset), and iii) the forecast event date is
within a given interval of the true event date (the date offset). Once these inclusion
criteria apply, the quality score (QS) of the match is defined as a combination of the
location score (LS) and date score (DS):
                                 QS = (LS + DS) ∗ 2                                (3)
where
                                     min(distance offset, 300)
                          LS = 1 −                                                 (4)
                                               300
and
                                   min(date offset, INTERVAL)
                        DS = 1 −                                                   (5)
                                          INTERVAL
                                                (b) Alerts distribution from 2012-11 to
(a) GSR distribution from 2012-11 to 2014-03.
                                                               2014-03.


Figure 5: Distribution of alerts and GSR events across the Latin American countries
                                 studied in this paper.


Here, we explore INTERVAL values from 0 to 7. If an alert (conversely, GSR event)
cannot be matched to any GSR event (alert, respectively), these unmatched alerts
(and events) will negatively impact the precision (and recall) of the system. The
lead time, for a matched alert-event pair, is calculated as the difference between the
date on which the forecast was made and the date on which the event was reported
(this should not be confused with the date score, which is the difference between
the predicted event date and the actual event date). Lead time concerns itself with
reporting and forecasting, whereas the date score is concerned with quality or
accuracy.
   We conduct a series of experiments to evaluate the performance of our system.
How does the distribution of protests detected by the system compare with the
actual distribution of protests in the GSR? Fig. 5 reveals pie charts of both
distributions. As shown, Mexico, Brazil, and Venezuela experience the lion’s share
of protests in our region of interest, and the protests detected also match these
modes although not the specific percentages. Smaller countries like Ecuador, El
Salvador, and Uruguay do experience protests but which are not as prominently
detected as those for other countries; we attribute this to their smaller social media
footprint (relative to countries like Brazil and Venezuela).
Table 2: Country-wise breakdown of forecasting performance for different data sources.
 QS=Quality Score; Pr=Precision; Rec=Recall; LT=Lead Time. AR=Argentina; BR=Brazil;
  CL=Chile; CO=Colombia; EC=Ecuador;SV=El Salvador; MX=Mexico; PY=Paraguay;
UY=Uruguay; VE=Venezuela. A − indicates that the source did not produce any warnings
                        for that country in the studied period.

                  News/Blogs                   Twitter                      Facebook                    Combined

           QS      Pr.    Rec. LT       QS     Pr.    Rec. LT        QS     Pr.    Rec. LT       QS     Pr.    Rec. LT

     AR    3.14    0.32   0.69   3.94   3.52   0.78   0.14   3.14    3.70   0.50   0.04   3.00   3.02   0.36   0.80   4.50
     BR    3.14    0.48   0.54   5.85   -      -      -      -       3.62   0.76   0.18   2.46   3.28   0.49   0.65   5.15
     CL    3.06    0.91   0.67   5.40   3.52   1.00   0.23   4.29    -      -      -      -      3.16   0.83   0.80   5.92
     CO    2.74    0.90   0.56   7.44   3.30   1.00   0.15   2.43    4.00   1.00   0.02   2.00   2.88   0.84   0.65   6.47
     EC    -       -      -      -      2.32   1.00   0.06   17.00   -      -      -      -      2.32   0.50   0.06   17.00
     MX    2.96    0.88   0.25   3.69   3.14   1.00   0.02   1.43    3.72   0.67   0.01   2.00   3.00   0.87   0.27   3.51
     SV    3.22    1.00   0.03   1.00   -      -      -      -       -      -      -      -      3.22   1.00   0.03   1.00
     PY    3.38    1.00   0.16   9.11   3.84   1.00   0.04   11.40   3.96   1.00   0.01   2.00   3.60   0.96   0.20   9.35
     UY    3.24    1.00   0.29   2.40   -      -      -      -       -      -      -      -      3.24   1.00   0.29   3.24
     VE    3.80    1.00   0.36   3.27   3.68   0.97   0.33   2.39    -      -      -      -      3.64   0.99   0.69   2.88
     ALL   3.34    0.69   0.35   4.57   3.62   0.97   0.15   2.82    3.66   0.74   0.03   2.44   3.36   0.73   0.51   4.08
Table 3: Comparing the location and date scores of different sources in specific countries.
  AR=Argentina; BR=Brazil; CL=Chile; CO=Colombia; EC=Ecuador;SV=El Salvador;
MX=Mexico; PY=Paraguay; UY=Uruguay; VE=Venezuela. A − indicates that the source did
           not produce any warnings for that country in the studied period.

     Source               AR    BR   CL    CO EC      SV    MX PY      UY    VE   All
                    LS    0.82 0.76 0.75 0.60 -       0.75 0.66 0.79 0.79 0.95 0.81
     News/Blogs
                    DS    0.75 0.81 0.78 0.77 -       0.86 0.82 0.90 0.83 0.95 0.86
                    LS    1.0 0.92 -       1.00 -     -     0.86 0.98 -      -    0.93
     Facebook
                    DS    0.85 0.89 -      1.00 -     -     1.00 1.00 -      -    0.90
                    LS    0.88 -     0.84 0.81 0.45 -       0.71 0.98 -      0.91 0.89
     Twitter
                    DS    0.88 -     0.92 0.84 0.71 -       0.86 0.94 -      0.93 0.92
 (a) Quality Score over the months     (b) Venezuelan Protests        (c) Lead-Time vs Quality Score
   (d) QS vs Matching Interval
                                     (e) Quality Score Distribution        (f) Brazilian Spring
            Trade-Off


               Figure 6: Evaluation of planned protest forecasting system


Are there country-specific selective superiorities for the different data sources
considered here? Table 2 presents a breakdown of performance, country-wise and
source-wise, of our approach for a particular month, viz. March 2014. It is clear that
the multiple data sources are necessary to achieve a high recall and that by and
large these sources are providing mutually exclusive alerts. (Note also that some
data sources do not produce alerts for specific countries.) Between Twitter and
Facebook, the former is a better source of alerts for countries like Chile and the
latter is a better source for Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, and Mexico. News and
blogs achieve higher recall than social media sources indicating that most plans for
protests are announced in established media. They are also higher quality sources
for alerts in countries like El Salvador, Paraguay, and Uruguay. Finally, note that
news and blogs offer a much higher lead time (4.57 days) as compared to that for
Facebook (2.44 days) or for Twitter (2.82 days). The quality scores are further
broken down in Table 3 into their date and location components.
   A longitudinal perspective on quality scores is given in Fig. 6a. Note that in
general Twitter tends to have a higher quality score as multiple re-tweets of future
event mentions is a direct indicator of the popularity of an event as well as the
intent of people to join an event. In contrast, mentions of future events in news do
not directly shed any insight into popularity or people’s support for the event’s
causes.
How did our system fare in detecting key country-wide protests?
   The recent Venezuelan protests against President Nicolas Maduro and the
Brazilian protests during June 2013 against bus fare hikes were two significant
protests during our period of evaluation. Fig. 6b and Fig. 6f describe our
performance under these two situations illustrating the count of protests detected
against the GSR. Notice that our system was able to identify the Venezuelan
protests much better than the Brazilian protests. This is because there was a
significant amount of spontaneity to the Brazilian protests; they arose as discontent
about bus fare increases but later morphed into a broader set of protests against
government and most of these subsequent protests were not planned.
What is the trade-off between lead time and quality?
   Fig. 6c shows that the QS of the planned protest model decreases (as expected)
with lead time, initially, but later rises again. The higher quality scores toward the
right of Fig. 6c are primarily due to Facebook event pages.
How does the method perform under stringent matching criteria? Fig. 6d shows
the performance of the model when the matching window is varied from 7 to 1 in
steps. We can see that the performance degrades quite gracefully even under the
strict matching interval of a 1-day difference.
What is the distribution of quality scores? The clear mode toward the right side
of the Fig. 6e signifies that a majority of the planned protest alerts are of high
quality. Further, the quality score distribution is unimodal suggesting that the
careful reasoning of locations and date normalization are crucial to achieving high
quality.

                            Development and Maintenance
The core algorithms behind the planned protest detector were implemented in
Python. The PSL geocoder was implemented in Java. Among the external libraries
utilized the Basis Rosette Linguistic Platform is the key library. The development
process took 3 months (June 2012 to Aug 2012) and was primarily led by the first
author with contributions from the other authors. After two months of testing (Sep
2012 and Oct 2012), the system was deployed in Nov 2012 on the commercial AWS
(Amazon Web Services) cloud infrastructure in a cluster configuration. More
details about the EMBERS system architecture can be found in Doyle et al. (2014).
Alerts generated by the system are automatically emailed to MITRE (for evaluation)
as well as to analysts who are subject matter experts in Latin America.
  Since there is not an explicit training phase, the system has required minimal
re-engineering over time. Key changes made to the system over time was to
increase the sources used for data ingest and supporting the inclusion of additional
phrases. Agile software engineering methods were used for project management.
We estimate the effort to maintain the system as 0.25 persons (software engineer)
per year which entails keeping data sources current, ensuring that the phrase list
continues to stay relevant, and performing periodic checks and evaluations of the
sytem.

                                    Discussion
We have described an approach to forecasting protests by detecting mentions of
future events in news and social media. The twin issues of i) resolving the date and
ii) resolving the location have been addressed satisfactorily to realize an effective
protest forecasting system. As different forms of communication media gain usage,
systems like ours will be crucial to understanding the concerns of citizenry.
   Our future work is aimed at three aspects. First, to address situations such as
nationwide protests and systems of protests, we must generalize our system from
generating protests at a single article level to digesting groups of articles. Doing so
would require more sophisticated probabilistic reasoning, which we believe can be
done using PSL. Second, we would like to generalize our approach that currently
does detection of overt plans for protest to not-so-explicitly stated expressions of
discontent. Finally, we plan to consider other population-level events of interest
than just civil unrest, e.g., domestic political crises, and design detectors to
recognize the imminence of such events.

                               Acknowledgments
Supported by the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) via
DoI/NBC contract number D12PC000337, the US Government is authorized to
reproduce and distribute reprints of this work for Governmental purposes
notwithstanding any copyright annotation thereon. Disclaimer: The views and
conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted
as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements, either expressed
or implied, of IARPA, DoI/NBC, or the US Government.

                                    References
Bach, S. H.; Huang, B.; London, B.; and Getoor, L. 2013. Hinge-loss Markov
Random Fields: Convex Inference for Structured Prediction. In Uncertainty in
Artificial Intelligence.
Baeza-Yates, R. 2005. Searching the Future. In SIGIR Workshop on
Mathematical/Formal Methods in Information Retrieval.
Banko, M.; Cafarella, M. J.; Soderland, S.; Broadhead, M.; and Etzioni, O. 2007.
Open Information Extraction from the Web. In International Joint Conferences on
Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI.
Chambers, N., and Jurafsky, D. 2011. Template-based Information Extraction
Without the Templates. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, HLT.
Compton, R.; Lee, C.; Lu, T.-C.; De Silva, L.; and Macy, M. 2013. Detecting Future
Social Unrest in Unprocessed Twitter Data:“Emerging Phenomena and Big data”.
In IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics, ISI.
Doyle, A.; Katz, G.; Summers, K. M.; Ackermann, C.; Zavorin, I.; Lim, Z.; Muthiah,
S.; Zhao, L.; Lu, C.; Butler, P.; Khandpur, R. P.; Fayed, Y.; and Ramakrishnan, N.
2014. The EMBERS Architecture for Streaming Predictive Analytics. In IEEE
International Conference on Big Data.
Gabrilovich, E.; Dumais, S.; and Horvitz, E. 2004. Newsjunkie: Providing
Personalized Newsfeeds via Analysis of Information Novelty. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW.
Hurriyetoglu, A. H.; Kunneman, F.; and van den Bosch, A. 2013. Estimating the
Time between Twitter Messages and Future Events. In Proceedings of the
Dutch-Belgian Workshop on Information Retrieval, DIR.
Jatowt, A., and Au Yeung, C. m. 2011. Extracting Collective Expectations About
the Future from Large Text Collections. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM International
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM.
Kallus, N. 2014. Predicting Crowd Behavior with Big Public Data. In Proceedings of
the 23rd international conference on World wide web, WWW.
Kawai, H.; Jatowt, A.; Tanaka, K.; Kunieda, K.; and Yamada, K. 2010.
ChronoSeeker: Search Engine for Future and Past Events. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Uniquitous Information Management and Communication,
ICUIMC.
Kimmig, A.; Bach, S.; Broecheler, M.; Huang, B.; and Getoor, L. 2012. A Short
Introduction to Probabilistic Soft Logic. In Proceedings of the NIPS Workshop on
Probabilistic Programming: Foundations and Applications.
Llorens, H.; Derczynski, L.; Gaizauskas, R. J.; and Saquete, E. 2012. TIMEN: An
Open Temporal Expression Normalisation Resource. In Proceedings of Language
Resources and evaluation, LREC.
Mani, I., and Wilson, G. 2000. Robust Temporal Processing of News. In Proceedings
of the Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL.
Padro,´ L., and Stanilovsky, E. 2012. Freeling 3.0: Towards Wider Multilinguality.
In Proceedings of the Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, LREC.
Pustejovsky, J.; Castano, J. M.; Ingria, R.; Sauri, R.; Gaizauskas, R. J.; Setzer, A.;
Katz, G.; and Radev, D. R. 2003. TimeML: Robust Specification of Event and
Temporal Expressions in Text. New directions in question answering.
Radinsky, K., and Horvitz, E. 2013. Mining the Web to Predict Future Events. In
Proceedings of the Sixth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining,
WSDM.
Ramakrishnan, N.; Butler, P.; Muthiah, S.; et al. 2014. ‘Beating the news’ with
EMBERS: Forecasting Civil Unrest using Open Source Indicators. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, SIGKDD.
Riloff, E., and Wiebe, J. 2003. Learning Extraction Patterns for Subjective
Expressions. In Proceedings of the conference on Empirical methods in natural language
processing, EMNLP.
    ¨
Strotgen,   J.; Armiti, A.; Van Canh, T.; Zell, J.; and Gertz, M. 2014. Time for More
Languages: Temporal Tagging of Arabic, Italian, Spanish, and Vietnamese. ACM
Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing (TALIP).
Tops, H.; van den Bosch, A.; and Kunneman, F. 2013. Predicting Time-to-Event
from Twitter Messages. In Proceedings of the Benelux Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, BNAIC.
Truv´e, S. 2011. Big Data for the Future: Unlocking the Predictive Power of the Web.
Recorded Future, Cambridge, MA, Tech. Rep.
Verhagen, M.; Gaizauskas, R.; Schilder, F.; Hepple, M.; Moszkowicz, J.; and
Pustejovsky, J. 2009. The TempEval Challenge: Identifying Temporal Relations in
Text. Language Resources and Evaluation.
Xu, J.; Lu, T.-C.; Compton, R.; and Allen, D. 2014. Civil Unrest Prediction: A
Tumblr-Based Exploration. In Social Computing, Behavioral-Cultural Modeling and
Prediction.
   Sathappan Muthiah is a Ph.D student in Computer Science at Virginia Tech. He
is a research assistant at the Discovery Analytics Center.His research interests
include spatial and temporal event detection, text mining and information retrieval.
He recieved his B.Tech in Information Technology from National Institute of
Technology, Bhopal, India.
   Bert Huang is an assistant professor in the Department of Computer Science at
Virginia Tech. Bert’s research investigates machine learning, with a focus on topics
including structured prediction, statistical relational learning, and computational
social science. He is an action editor for the Journal of Machine Learning Research,
and his papers have been published at conferences including NIPS, ICML, UAI,
and AISTATS. He earned his Ph.D. from Columbia University in 2011, and he was
a postdoctoral research associate at the University of Maryland, College Park.
   Jaime Arredondo is a Ph.D. candidate in global public health at UC San Diego.
His research centers on developing more sophisticated analytical skills and
research techniques to analyze the effect of policing practices as a major driver of
HIV transmission, particularly in the U.S.–Mexico border region.He is
collaborating with the UC San Diego Division of Global Public Health on its El
Cuete, Phase IV project. Funded by the National Institute of Health, the project
aims to identify how formal law enforcement policies can affect HIV risk behavior
among injection drug users (IDU) amid improving occupational safety of police
officers in Tijuana, Mexico.
   David Mares is a professor of Political Science at UCSD. He holds the Institute
of the Americas Chair for Inter-American Affairs at UCSD. He is the author or
editor of ten books and his publications have appeared in English, Spanish, French,
Portuguese, Italian and Chinese. His research and teaching interests include
international conflict, Latin American energy politics, the political economy of drug
policy, and civil-military relations.
   Lise Getoor is a professor in the Computer Science Department at the University
of California, Santa Cruz. Her research areas include machine learning, data
integration, and reasoning under uncertainty, with an emphasis on graph and
network data. She has over 200 publications and extensive experience with
machine learning and probabilistic modeling methods. She is a Fellow of the
Association for Artificial Intelligence, an elected board member of the International
Machine Learning Society, serves on the board of the Computing Research
Association (CRA), and was co-chair for ICML 2011. She is a recipient of an NSF
Career Award and nine best paper and best student paper awards. She received
her PhD from Stanford University in 2001, her MS from UC Berkeley, and her BS
from UC Santa Barbara, and was a professor in the Computer Science Department
at the University of Maryland, College Park from 2001-2013.
   Naren Ramakrishnan is the Thomas L. Phillips Professor of Engineering at
Virginia Tech. He directs the Discovery Analytics Center, a university center
pursuing advanced research in data mining and knowledge discovery with
applications to important areas of national interest. Ramakrishnan is the principal
investigator of the ongoing IARPA OSI (Open Source Indicators) project aimed at
forecasting significant societal events (disease outbreaks, civil unrest, elections)
from open source datasets. He received his PhD in Computer Sciences from
Purdue University.
